Tropical peat swamp forests are ombrotrophic wetland ecosystems that sequester carbon (C)  into vegetation and, especially, into peat below the forest floor. The woody peat formed in these ecosystems is rich in C (~56 % on a dry mass basis) and the peat deposits can be several metres thick over vast areas, making tropical peatlands globally important C stores (Page et al. 2011). Tropical peat extending over an area of 25  Mha in south-east Asia is estimated to contain  11‒14 % (68.5 Gt) of the global peat C reservoir  (Page  et al.  2011).  Land-use change in tropical peatlands has accelerated during the past few decades, and in 2007 approximately 60 % of the peat swamp forest in south-east Asia had been impacted by logging (Miettinen & Liew 2010). A major concern in relation to this rapidly advancing land-use change has been the transformation of large parts of the peatland ecosystems into C sources of global significance (Hooijer et al. 2010, Page et al. 2011, Comeau et al. 2013). Less attention has been paid to changes taking place in the peat matrix after land-use change, even though the physical and chemical properties of peat are important constraints for all soil processes  including  decomposition and nutrient cycling. Peat is formed primarily from decaying organic substrates and  the  biomass of the  decomposer communities consuming them. Vegetation facilitates peat  accumulation  by adding organic substrates (litter), both onto the peat surface and into the peat in the  rooting zone. Therefore,  peat  processes and properties interact closely and dynamically with the vegetation (Radjagukguk  et al. 1998, Page  et al. 1999). Oxygen availability, in turn controlled largely by the position of the water-table level (WL) in the peat profile,  determines  the dominance of either faster aerobic decomposition (in oxic conditions) or anaerobic decomposition (in water-saturated anoxic conditions)  (Clymo 1984,  Vasander & Kettunen 2006). Land-use change and drainage lead to permanent WL drawdown and thus create a thicker oxic peat layer within which aerobic decomposition is favoured.  The  predominantly  aerobic decomposition  under  drained conditions generally facilitates more efficient release of C from the peat than  the  anaerobic decomposition processes that dominate in water-saturated peat (e.g., Jauhiainen et al. 2005, 2008). Simultaneously, however, several other processes shape the physical and chemical properties of the peat. Peat subsidence starts with the onset of drainage, due to loss of water from surface-peat pores and the 
M. Könönen et al.   PROPERTIES OF TROPICAL PEAT UNDER STABILISED LAND USES   Mires and Peat, Volume 16 (2015), Article 08, 1–13, http://www.mires-and-peat.net/, ISSN 1819-754X © 2015 International Mire Conservation Group and International Peat Society 2 shrinkage that accompanies drying;  and  continues with increasing dominance of biological decomposition, leading to increased  bulk density (BD; dry mass per fresh volume) and reduced porosity (volume of air space between particles) (Minkkinen & Laine 1998,  Kurnain  et al. 2001, Hooijer et al. 2012,  Couwenberg & Hooijer 2013, Moore et al. 2013).  Drainage and land-use change may further affect nutrient concentrations in the peat directly via  leaching and indirectly via changes in nutrient cycling arising from changes in vegetation (e.g., Radjagukguk  et al. 1998, Laiho  et al. 1999, Westman & Laiho 2003). Furthermore, the number and severity of wildfires increases  in drained and deforested areas; and fire events can, within a few days,  expose  peat layers that were previously at depths of several decimetres  (Page  et al.  2002, Hoscilo et al. 2011). This undoubtedly has potential impacts on the physical and chemical properties of both the surface peat and vertical peat profiles. Although  several processes modify peat properties  in reclaimed areas, there is still little information on the magnitude of the changes even under  common stabilised  land  uses.  In particular, systematic studies on the changes in peat properties that occur under long-term land uses that differ in terms of management intensity have been lacking. The main objective of this study was to compare physical (bulk density;  particle size distribution; porosity) and chemical (pH; ash content; C, N, P, K, Ca, Mg, Mn, Zn, Na, Al, Fe, S and Si concentrations) properties of peat under four land-use  types  that clearly differ in management intensity. By studying these  key  properties  under selected land uses,  in profiles from the surface down to normally water-saturated peat, we assess a continuum of conditions; and this enables us to discern the major changes in peat physical and chemical properties that occur after land-use change. We  hypothesised  that: (i) long-term  use  of peatland  leads to changes  in  the  physical and chemical properties of peat; (ii) the changes in peat properties  occur  in  the  peat  layers  that are not normally water-saturated; and (iii) land-use-specific changes in peat properties are more extreme when both vegetation and WL depth are affected, i.e., in open sites as compared to forested sites.   METHODS  Study area The study area was on lowland peat in a catchment basin  of  the  Sebangau River  (2°  12′ 36″ S, 113°  55′ 12″ E)  in  the province of Central Kalimantan,   Indonesia   (Figure 1).   For   the   period    Figure 1. Locations of the study sites in undrained forest and Block C of the ‘mega rice project’ (MRP) area in Central Kalimantan, Indonesia. 
M. Könönen et al.   PROPERTIES OF TROPICAL PEAT UNDER STABILISED LAND USES   Mires and Peat, Volume 16 (2015), Article 08, 1–13, http://www.mires-and-peat.net/, ISSN 1819-754X © 2015 International Mire Conservation Group and International Peat Society 3 2002–2010, average annual rainfall in the region was 2540 ± 596 mm yr-1 and mean annual air temperature was 26.2 ± 0.3 ºC (Sundari et al. 2012). There are clear wet and dry seasons, with the wettest period between December and February and the driest months being August and September.  Study sites In the past, the river basin containing the four closely-located study sites was covered by swamp forest on thick (> 3 m) ombrotrophic peat. The sites selected for this study in 2009 differed in terms of their vegetation characteristics and/or  hydrological conditions as a result of human-induced changes at three of the sites several decades ago.  In order of increasing management intensity, the study sites are described as: (i) undrained peat swamp forest (UF) and (ii) drained peat swamp forest (DF), which were characterised by forest vegetation; (iii) drained, degraded open peatland (DO) and (iv) drained open peatland in settled agricultural use (AO), which were clear-felled and affected by fire (Figure 1, Table 1). The vegetation of both of the forested sites was close to steady-state forest despite former selective and illegal logging activities (Page  et al.  1999; Jauhiainen et  al. 2005, 2008). On the floor of the undrained forest, microtopographical features ranged from an open peat surface forming the base level to vegetated  ‘hummocks’  some  decimetres high. Surface features were less pronounced in the drained forest. Hydrologically, the undrained forest site was close to intact, and large portions of the base-level surface  were  flooded  during the wet season (Figure 2). The drained forest site was located within an area drained by a canal measuring 25 m wide and 3−4 m deep,  which was dug in 1997−1998. The degraded open peatland site was influenced by the same canal.